+++
title = "Ways to Move"
description = ""
date = 2021-02-24T08:53:30-07:00
draft = false
+++

Before I started moving through the world on foot so often, I never thought there could be so many different ways to relate to a space as I moved through it. Like every delicacy, though, the experience multiplies in complexity the more we savor it (or chomp on it, or wolf it down).

## I can run straight through a place. 

Whoom. No recollection of faces or places or other external details, regardless of my speed (although slowing down lessens that chance). The quality of my activity itself is what is recorded in my mind. At its best, this type of movement is primarily a means to relate to myself. At its worst, my obsession with the metrics streaming from my wrist takes me away from everything that is real, including myself - I become a series of data points on the screen before I even finish. There is only so much attention I have to give, so I can only spread it out so far. Maybe I see how I'm feeling emotionally. Maybe I see how it feels to run this fast, focusing on my breathing and my sense of effort and all my body sensations. There is certainly a benefit in knowing myself this way; even when I'm not running, I know how it feels to live in my body. At the end of this kind of effort, I am not sure I can really say I went to any place. I was not experiencing the outside world.

There isn't anything inherently misguided going on here. I believe it is possible and praiseworthy to transcend the everyday through regular, routine effort. The person who gets up every morning and hits the pavement no matter what probably has a lot of insight to show for it. (I say this with admiration - I have never been that person, just approached living up to their monastic lifestyle from time to time). Best of all, this type of relationship to place is the most flexible in its requirements. It is a type of transcendence that is attainable even while getting odd glances for running along a sidewalk-free berm in the sweltering South.

It is also possible to run through sublime beauty and completely ignore the surroundings because of our preoccupation with our *real lives*, whatever those are. When I grind out another run around Boulder in pursuit of an arbitrary goal that I know deep down will add no meaning to my life, or when I fill my entire hike with unnecessary chatter to keep at bay whomever owns the glowing red eyes I perceive in silence. There are right kinds of diligence, action, and speech. Sometimes it's just so damn hard to tell them apart through my own illusions.

## I can become engulfed in a place. 

That place can be a new town, giving me a lay of the land that I simply cannot come by any other way. I eventually understand how everything fits together, how the back roads relate to the big ones. Seeing the interconnections is vital to my understanding of anything. I cannot say I really know it until the map appears in my mind. It happens quickly, but before it does, I feel blind and helpless and humble. Like a sunrise, that ephemeral lost feeling doesn't linger long, but I try to drink it up because it feels so inexpressibly different than the full-blown light of knowledge. And similarly, it is hopeless to fully describe the feeling of a particular sunrise.

Boulder's network of trails gave me this feeling for a long time, too. I would feel hopelessly unable to gain a sense of direction, lost in the woods above Chautauqua park, where all the trails look and sound the same. Then something changed. I would become obsessed with the feeling of a certain area. I would hike it again and again until my familiarity made it seem a little less removed from the real world. A little corner was illuminated as I explored it until my craving for novelty drew me to a new, mystical place. Then I would savor the not-knowing of another node in the network. The teeter-tottering between being lost and becoming familiar worked like the lever on a pump, drawing something out of the earth in these places that can never be returned. The isolated zones of familiarity bled together into a gigantic spider's web that I could traverse at will. 

The transition from mystery to knowledge means flipping over a coin. Once I gain my top-down understanding, I sacrifice something else: my ability to feel lost and small. I need that too. Inside that fear, the environment dictates the terms, and I feel very little control. Hope and self-confidence are the currency there, rather than knowledge and measurements. It isn't always the most comfortable feeling, but it is humbling. The key for me is to reinforce my novelty-seeking with sufficient precautions, like rock climbers (no thanks, for now) who tie themselves off while they try something really daring.

I have to keep finding that new place to be humbled. That feeling is elusive - grab it once and you won't be able to find it in the exact same form again. I've hiked Longs Peak three times now. It used to feel like another planet, cruel and indifferent and hostile. I would arrive in the darkness, unsure of my fate, and I would depart awash in a victorious rush of new confidence, leaping down from the Keyhole into the Boulderfield. Now it feels like a beautiful extended hike through multiple ecosystems. I love to go through the Keyhole as soon as light allows, flipping me over into that terrifying dark moonscape for just a bit longer. But the light comes through and breaks the atmosphere I've worked hard to cultivate. Standing on top now feels different, more familiar. From there, I know where Boulder is; I know the names of the surrounding peaks; I can trace various hikes I've taken in the valleys below; I can feel the Indian Peaks snarling at me and beckoning me to the south. I am in my wonderful home. I am not on another planet, I am on my Mount Olympus. The electrifying, unpredictable emotions have given way to a smoldering fondness. It's holy, not horrifying. I can't say which experience is better, because they live in different dimensions. Informed by each other, the pursuit of one giving way to the other. Back in town, Bear Peak used to feel this way. I stumbled to its rocky summit for the first time in 2014, and I felt like I was on Mars. Could these red rocks really be that high above Boulder? Nowadays, I squeeze in a quick ascent before sunset. Bear Peak has lost a certain quality for me. That much is clear when I literally look down upon it from Longs Peak, almost 6000 feet higher. But it has gained something else, too. I still cry, just not for fear.

## I can go on a mission of pure survival, a quest for the Holy Grail. 

All in the pursuit of something. It's a razor edge of novelty and uncertainty and physical limitations. I'd better make sure the prize is worth it! It isn't really about what I find out there, although the things I find would probably register as sublime under other circumstances. To explain the difference, contrast the experience of watching the sun rise in a lush mountain valley while cradling a warm cup of coffee on the porch of a cabin, with that of your eyes adjusting to raw alpenglow blasting sheer cliff faces into a vibrant pink-then-orange as you treasure the opportunity to switch off your headlamp after hours of climbing in darkness.

This quality characterized many of my ascents during my 14er bagging phase. "Can I even manage to do it?" was the predominant question, and I thought answering it (affirmatively) was the most important thing. I ran a marathon too. I ran an ultra. What did I want? A sticker? I kept finding things I could do and waving them around. A practical mindset that put my goal front and center was a necessary one, because I would not compromise on attaining it. I hoped I might have something to show when I came back down. I wasn't entirely sure if I was getting what I was after, so I kept doing it, and people kept telling me how much I had to show for it. I trusted their assessment of me, until eventually I looked into my bag with my own eyes and found it empty. I had to find a more real holy grail to quest after. Real *to me*, that is. I think it's natural to shift objectives like this, when we get what we're after and are forced to inspect the trophy.

Whether I slept near the trailhead or awoke in the middle of the night to drive there, I felt a vice of tension around my whole body. I would listen to standup comedy to try and thwart it. It was about going out there and *kicking the mountain's ass*, which in hindsight I find to be a hilarious, false notion. That mindset was a coping mechanism, a way to repress my horror at the idea that I was recreating on the mountain's terms. One time, I drove up to a trailhead and could no longer deny my repressed fear. The Blanca Massif was surrounded in clouds, exploding up from the San Luis Valley completely unshielded by foothills (such is the way of the young and aggressive Sange de Cristo Range). It wasn't that it was glaring down at me; it was that it didn't care about or notice me at all. I turned around and didn't come back for over a year. When I did, I had given up my false bravado. I let the fear swallow me whole. Think of Tommy Lee Jones' character in *Men In Black* screaming for the giant bug to eat him, so he could go into its stomach to retrieve the thing he was after. I don't go on so many holy grail quests these days, mostly because I often don't have something so important that I need to grab from the belly of the beast. Not another checkmark on my peak list, that's for sure.

A lot of my past striving has had aspects like this. I didn't recognize it as striving, really. It was just the way of life that came naturally to me (let's unpack all that another day). I shudder to think what four months on the Appalachian Trail would have meant to me at the time *if I didn't make it all the way to Georgia*. As I said, whenever I do something, there is only so much of my attention to spread around, like peanut butter on the slice of toast that is reality at any moment. I spent a lot of my mental capacity on the A.T. thinking about how to go faster and further and how to avoid the lingering doubts about what it all meant and about my general approach to the trail. If I finished fast, if I was impressive, would I matter? Later I asked, "*to whom* should I matter?"...always more questions where I thought there would be answers! That green tunnel was a blur. The surroundings and the people included. Luckily, it was a lot of things on top of that. Through my striving to *go go go*, I kept getting knocked on my ass by gigantic moments that made me feel small, I kept running into people who challenged my belief that people sucked, I kept benefitting from a cosmic kindness that left an impression on me even though I wasn't looking for it. That's what I treasure now. 

I guess I just hope that other strivers are able to get knocked off course like I eventually was. The saddest thought I have is of people staying exactly the way they are and getting exactly what they hoped for. What's the fun in that? Where's the vertical component? These days I dream of going rim-to-rim-to-rim in the Grand Canyon. But a fear creeps in: what if, the whole time, I saw it as a footpath the whole time and never once perceived the cathedral? The thought alone terrifies me more than dehydration. As I know now, there is no standard experience on a given route through a place. There are many different ways to move.